[Music]
Good day ,I'm Norman Wildberger last time we
started a new framework for geometry based on
arithmetic only the main ideas were that of a
point and a line so we defined a point such as
this a to be an ordered pair of rational numbers
enclosed in square brackets and we defined a line
to be a proportion of three rational numbers A
to B to C enclosed in pointed brackets with the
Proviso that A and B cannot both be zero and we
connected these two definitions by saying that
the point a say XY lies on the line A to B to C
precise prely when a x + b y + C = 0 and that's
telling us that the proportion A to B to C is
representing the line whose equation is ax + b y +
C = 0 now today we want to go a little bit further
and introduce some other definitions relating to
these basic ones so first of all let's discuss
parallel and perpendicular lines by starting
with two lines l L1 and L2 so our convention
is that L1 has coefficients A1 to B1 to C1 L2
has coefficients A2 to B2 to C2 we'll say that
these two lines are parallel precisely when A1
* B2 - A2 * B1 is0 and that will be written with
this notation L1 parallel to L2 so when we check
for parallelism we're only looking at the first
two entries this time this has to equal this time
this we say that two lines are perpendicular
precisely when A1 * A2 + B1 * B2 = 0 we write
that L1 perpendicular to L2 so in that case
it means that this time this plus this time
this should equal zero now these two two
definitions are completely independent of
any pictures but if you go ahead and draw lots
of examples using an ordinary piece of graph
paper and interpreting these lines in terms
of an equation like this you will see very
quickly that these two Notions correspond
to the usual familiar Notions of parallel
lines and perpendicular lines so for example the
line 3 to 4 to minus one is parallel to the Line
6 to 8 to 5 since 3 * 8 - 4 * 6 = 0 which
amounts to saying that this proportion 3:
4 equals this proportion 6 to 8 on the other hand
the line 3 to 4 to minus1 is perpendicular to the
line -4 to 3 to 2 because 3 * -4 + 4 * 3 = 0 all
right now here we have a theorem which we call
the meat of the lines theorem if L1 is the line
with coefficients A1 to B1 to C1 and L2 is the
line with coefficients A2 to B2 to C2 if these are
not parallel lines then there is a unique point a
which lies on both of them and this unique point
a which is written L1 L2 is called the meat of the
two lines it's given explicitly by this rather
complicated looking formula so it's a point it
has two coordinates the first one is B1 C2 - B2
C1 / A1 B2 - A2 B1 and the second coefficient is
C1 A2 - C2 A1 all over again the same thing A1 B2
- A2 B1 and this is proven by essentially solving
two equations for an unknown X and Y there's
the equation of a point lying on L1 there's the
equation for that same point lying on L2 we solve
those two equations in a reasonably familiar way
for x and y and you get these two coordinates we
say that three points A1 A2 and A3 are collinear
if they all line on a single line L we say three
lines L1 L2 and L3 are concurrent if they all pass
through a given point a now there's a theorem
cinear points theor that tells us exactly when
three points are cinear states that the three
points with coordinates X1 y1 X2 Y2 and X3 Y3 are
cinear precisely when this quantity is zero this
quantity is X1 Y2 - X1 Y3 + X2 Y3 - X3 Y2 + x3
y1 - X2 y1 and the proof is an exercise using the
fact that we can calculate the join of these two
lines and then figure out when this point lies on
the joint of these two lines you get exactly this
expression there's a course responding theorem
for concurrent lines and I'll leave that to you
as an exercise and now we come to an absolutely
fundamental definition really the essential
object in elementary geometry is a triangle
it's collection of three non-colinear points
that's exactly our definition so a triangle
is by definition a set of three non-colinear
points three non-colinear points in a set so for
example here's a triangle it's a set consisting
of three things each one of these is a point
and we introduce the notation that instead of
writing it in terms of sets like this we'll just
write the three points with a bar over it that
means the triangle whose points are A1 A2 and
A3 triangles are fundamental objects of study
in Geometry as I hope you all know so here's
an example we have 3 point A1 A2 A3 - 3 4 45
1 1 those are noncolinear points you can check
and they DET determine therefore a triangle that
triangle has three lines the lines are the ones
formed by pairs of points and the join of points
theorem allows you to compute those for example
to compute the line through A2 A3 we take y1
minus Y2 that's four then X2 - X1 that's -3 and
then 4 * 1 - 5 * 1 that's -1 you can check that
this line goes through those two points similarly
the line L2 is 3 to 4 to - 7 the line L3 is -1 to
7 to - 31 please check those calculations the
points A1 A2 and A3 are called the points of
a triangle the lines L1 l 2 and L3 are called
the lines of the triangle and we introduced two
other important Concepts the Notions of sides and
vertices the side of a triangle is something like
this A2 A3 with a bar over it by definition it's
a set of two of the three points of the triangle
so the set consisting of A2 and A3 is called the
side A2 A3 bar and similarly there's the the side
containing A1 and A3 and the side containing
A1 and A2 in a corresponding way the triangle
has three vertices a Vertex is by definition a
set consisting of two of the three lines of the
triangle so L1 L2 bar that's the set consisting
of L1 and L2 L1 L3 there's another vertex L2 L3
there's another vertex so we've established some
some basic definitions for triangles for lines
and points the next step and the one that many
of you will be wondering how we surmount it is
how do we introduce measurement into this geometry
since we're working only in the realm of rational
numbers next time I'm going to show you how to
introduce measurement into rational geometry
I hope you're going to join me for that I'm
Norman Wildberger, thanks for [Music] listening